Oh yeah, one other thing I better say. I will ask you questions that are very
obvious and that I know the answers to, but the listeners may not, so some of it
will just be simple background. Right. Okay. Whatever you wish.
First of all, could you say just a few brief words about when the Tolkien
Society was formed and basics like its membership and the number of countries
that belonged to it, things of that sort. The Society was founded in England in
1969 with a very small group of members. The Society has grown gradually over
the years, various notices in various books, directory listings and so on. We
now have 1,200 members approximately in 26 countries throughout the world. So
although we're based in England, I think we have the largest worldwide spread.
And the Society, I believe, has two publications. What are those? We have two
regular publications. Amon Hen is approximately bi-monthly. It's a bulletin and
a newsletter. Letters of comment from members, short articles, short poems,
small artwork. It's really for immediate consumption, the ephemeral material.
And the other publication is Mallorn, the journal. Very much more academic. Comes
out, we hope, twice a year. So sometimes we get a Mallorn and a Amon Hen together.
Mallorn is a larger format. It has longer poems. Sometimes they run to three
pages. Members' own poems. In the Tolkien manner. Some of them are imitations of
Tolkien's style. Others are members' own work in their own styles. Essays,
longer book reviews, articles of rather more specific interest. And it is very
much less time-dependent. What about any kinds of gatherings or meetings or
fellowship among the members? Is there any kind of activity of that sort? Oh,
yes, considerable. Our local groups are called Smials. From the Hobbit, a smial
is a comfortable Hobbit hole. And we hope that our members feel as comfortable
in our smials as they would in a Hobbit home. We have smials in many countries.
In some countries, there just aren't enough members to get together because
they're too widely separated. But in England, there are smials all over the
country. They run themselves as they wish. Some of them are very formal. Some
have costume. Others don't. Some publish their own little newsletters with
subsequent meeting venues, short reviews, little artwork. It just depends on
what the members in any particular area wish to do. Are there other types of
functions, like, for instance, the kind we have in America here with costuming
and feasting and things of that nature? We have two national meetings a year of
organised formality. There's the annual general meeting, which is our formal
event. We have a formal dinner with speakers and guests. It is not a convention.
The other meeting, which is, in fact, the largest of the national gatherings,
larger, with two of them, I should say, is Oxonmoot, held in Oxford over a
weekend in late September. And it is a weekend where members who otherwise don't
normally see other people come together. Smials send representative groups.
Other societies send representative groups. This year we should have groups from
Stockholm, from... There will be a representative from America. There will be
groups from all over the United Kingdom. And it is just a weekend of being in
company of Tolkien people. We have had an impromptu linguistic discussion with
an Englishman, a Frenchman, a Swede, a Dutchman, and a Norwegian, and we were
all speaking English of one sort or another. It was quite interesting seeing the
comparative linguistic analyses compared with their own translations.
This question, I think, may be a little difficult to answer.
Do you have any impressions of the... Let's put it this way. Are there
differences, say, between American Tolkien fans and British? I would imagine the
American fans may be a bit more... Oh, what? Less serious, perhaps. Extrovert.
Oh. Yeah, most definitely. American fans are very much more exuberant in the way
they go about things. We are... Well, some people think we may be a little bit
too staid and too formal. But it suits... It suits... Well, it sounds a bit high
-handed to say so, but it suits our purpose to be more literary and to keep our
costume event down to one a year. If we did everything in costume, then it might
lose some of its interest because that is not how we were set up. But the
Swedish societies, of which there are three major ones, do things in costume.
They are specifically organised in a manner very similar, in fact, to the
American SCA. They do... The Society for Creative Anachronism. They do things in
costume with weapons and they have guilds. But they don't publish quite so much
as we do. There's room in Tolkien fandom for all sorts. And it would be a poorer
place without either of us.
Is the Tolkien Society in contact with members of the Tolkien family and do they
ever... Yes, in quite considerable contact, I'm pleased to say. Oxonmoot is
usually... Well, for the past... In fact, since we started holding Oxonmoot, we
have been honoured by Priscilla Tolkien coming along to our party on Saturday.
She usually manages to bring some other family members with her. And on the
Sunday, we are all invited up to her house for a drink and much more talk. And
she's got a small house. And when you get nearly a hundred fans all crammed into
one small house and the garden, it can sometimes be a little difficult to move
around. Summer Moot this year, which has now happened, was under canvas this
year on the farm of Joan Baker, Michael Tolkien's daughter. So the professor's
granddaughter had the society pitch camp, as it were, on her farm after the
harvest. And I couldn't get to that, unfortunately. No, I'm telling lies. It
hasn't happened yet. My dates are all wrong. It happens just before I get back
from America. So I couldn't get to it. By the time this is broadcast, it may
very well have been over. So probably will be. But we'll take care of that. What
about Christopher Tolkien? Do you have any correspondence? Or does he contribute
anything? Or does he make you aware of papers that he still has, perhaps? We
only wish he did. Christopher is extremely busy with the papers. He is the
literary executor. And much as we would like to be in close contact with him to
answer all our questions, we would also like him to stay where he is somewhere
in France, busy editing, to publish more material. So we don't, in fact, have
any contact with him. That is by choice rather than by imposition.
Anything that we do find, we find out through various other sources. But we do
not have any correspondence directly with Christopher. It would be unfair to
bombard him with questions when the publication of the next book would quite
easily answer all those questions for us. Do you have any idea of any
significant material that may be unpublished that's left that he might be
working on? Well, there is a great deal of linguistic material still to be
published. Whether it will be published as a book of linguistic matters or
whether they will end up as footnotes in other books, I don't know. There is a
great deal of poetry. The Silmarillion had a remarkable lack of verse, which we
are waiting to see. There may be other tales filling in some gaps in Middle
-earth. But all we know is that there were papers sat in box files on a table
eight feet long. There is a considerable amount of material. How much of it is
publishable is not known. How much of it is readable is, again, a matter of
debate, because towards the end of his life, the professor's handwriting became
not so much untidy as illegible. And even Christopher can't read it. I've heard
that some of his material, maybe even personal journals, have been written in
Elvish. Is that correct? They were written in Tengwar, yes, certainly. Whether
they were written in the Elvish language, either of them, I don't know. I
somehow doubt it. It would be nice if they were, because then we'd have a much
larger vocabulary to work with. But Humphrey ran across this trouble when he was
writing the biography. Some of the diaries were written in Tengwar, and Humphrey
had to learn the Tengwar so that he could read the diaries and find out what he
was trying to write about. I heard you answer this over in the Tolkien mood a
little while ago, but I'd like you to make a restatement of this.
Is the Tolkien Society, the one in England or the ones in America, are they
going to run out of material ever? Is this something that can be ongoing, or is
it after you do a certain amount of work and get a certain amount of books out
and so forth, is it over with? Well, there are always new people coming in to
the societies. People discover Middle Earth at all ages. People will be asking
the same sort of questions, but they'll be asking them in different ways. And as
more and more material gets published, interpretations will vary. I think there
will be sufficient interest. After all, Sherlock Holmes Society has been going
for some time, and there's now no longer any possibility of more Sherlock Holmes
stories. It doesn't seem to worry them at all. And with what we already have of
Middle Earth, we can keep going for a considerable number of years. And of
course, we mustn't forget that the professor did a lot of pure academic
linguistic material, which is very difficult to find, but extremely worthwhile
when you can find it. And that will keep us going for a very, very long time.
Good. Okay, just a couple more questions, maybe of a personal nature.
Why do you think people from so many different countries, so many different
backgrounds, languages, and so forth, what is it about Tolkien that can draw
them together, that fascinates them?
Well, I can only say what the way I look at it. There are as many different
answers to that question as there are members, and maybe even more answers than
members. For my part, I think it fulfills a need that modern society has somehow
missed out. Fellowship is a very strong feeling throughout the books. That seems
to have disappeared from modern society. The idea of the high and the ancient
retaining some of its old power. Tolkien has been accused of stealing his ideas
from other mythological sources, which is irrelevant because those sources
themselves borrowed material from even earlier works. So that argument can be
discounted.
But there is a need for some sort of... Well, it's not a religious belief.
Tolkien would not have been happy with that suggestion. But it's a social
aspect. Modern society is becoming very isolated. Everyone is staying in their
own little city, and people move around by a plane. But you don't get to meet
people with the same likes, the same dislikes, or even the same taste in
literature. And societies like ours are helping to put people in contact with
each other, and so interchange ideas and opinions and ways of looking at life.
That's one of the best answers I've heard for that, and that's very good. Thank
you. Actually, that would be all I can think of that we would... Can you think
of anything else that I might be missing or that you would normally be asked in
this sort of interview that you could add? There are so much more. I mean, in
terms of the books themselves and the... Well, I could find statistics at you,
but... But, I mean... That would be meaningless. In terms of society itself,
maybe? Or I can't think of anything else that...
I mean, I have enough material. This is fine. I'm just wondering if there's... I
mean, since this was done without plan on my part, I may have been missing some
ideas or things that I would have thought of had I had some more time to work it
out.
Well, I'm satisfied if... Well, I can't think of anything that screams for
immediate publication. Well, I think that would work fine then, Mr. Simons. I
appreciate that. Thank you. That's just exactly where I wanted. Okay, we're on
the air. Well, I hope you might check. Let's see. Yeah. I'm just an English
teacher. Audiovisual man might walk in halfway through the interview. Okay,
first of all... Okay, now, obviously, I'll get some information from you before
you go about, you know, your name, your title. I mean, just any particulars
about the show. So there'll be an introduction to that. Right. Okay. First of
all, can you just say a few words about the Science Fiction Poetry Association?
When it started? It was founded in January 1978 by Suzette Hayden Elgin, who is
a novelist that lives or writes mostly Ozark tales. And she was interested in
poetry and saw no basic format or forum for poets within the Science Fiction or
Fantasy genres to get to know each other,
to work together and act together and organize some sort of network for people
to make
science fiction poetry more available to readers, basically. It's a national
group, then? You have members all over the country? It's a national group, and
our membership is up to 140. It doesn't sound like a whole lot, but we're kind
of on fire. Poets, you know, they're few in numbers, but we're on fire. Can you
say anything? I mean, do you have a structure, say, a president, things of that
sort? Yeah, our president is Gene Wolfe. He's a well-known science fiction
writer. And as the secretary, Maureen Kaplan, she takes care of all the
business. And I edit the newsletter, which is why you have me sitting here.
Okay, you edited the newsletter, then. Okay. Yes. Okay.
At the moment, the newsletter seems to be the focus of the organization because
we don't have any great amount of business that is important to us. We're sort
of like a very small nonprofit organization, just basically people getting to
know each other and setting up workshops at conventions, doing readings,
teaching each other a little bit about poetry, helping each other find good
markets. Some of us are editors of poetry magazines. Some of us are editors of
literary magazines. Some of us are just dabblers in poetry. Some of us take
marketing poetry seriously. Some of us write poetry to great lengths. Some
people just like to read poetry. Everybody is welcome to the organization. Are
most of your members, though, science fiction fans, too? It seems to work out
that way, but percentage-wise, it's probably, well, 75%, I would say, but I
should think it should be 90% in one sense. And I feel it shows that we do have
at least 25% membership of people who just are interested in poetry altogether,
which is healthy. I mean, we're not trying to be separate from the mainstream of
literary mainstream with poetry. That's for sure. Oh, you're not trying to be
separate? No. Well, can you say a few words about what, is there a basic
difference between science fiction, poetry, and regular poetry? Well, there's
several arguments about that. I think my basic viewpoint is that if it's science
fiction or fantasy poetry, if it's published within that genre, and because a
lot of the poetry really doesn't necessarily have to have unicorns or spaceships
in it, a lot of it can be about very peripheral things. I'd call them
speculative things. Well, is there anything about the style that would qualify,
or is it simply subject matter? Yeah, you can characterize it by the subject
matter, but it doesn't have to be spaceships or unicorns, like I said. It can be
about, well, have you ever picked up a telephone and heard someone talking on
the line somewhere far in the distance? It's another conversation between two
other people. Well, say you wrote a poem about that in the context of like there
were telephone ghosts that kind of live in the telephone line, okay? That would
be a mainstream poem, or it could be a science fiction poem, because it deals
sort of in the same realm that imagination, that fantastic imagination is in.
When did, you gave me the start of the organization already briefly, but what,
was this sort of an invention, this genre, or, I mean, do you look back in the
past and see poets from the ancient world or previous ages who wrote this kind
of poetry, or is this something that's been recognized just recently? Well, the
first form of literature was poetry, and the reason for it was that they had to
rhyme and meter it so they could pass it on verbally generation to generation.
And from that, prose spun off, you see. So poetry is very old, and one of the
very early poetic epics is Gilgamesh. And if you're familiar with Gilgamesh, you
might as well call that a fantasy. It had its other reasons for being written.
It was an instructive mythological tale, almost a fable in some ways, and
actually involves all sorts of instructions
for the people who were listening to it as it was passed through generations.
But it is fantastical in its content.
Do you have, you mentioned that you read or gather sometimes at different
conventions and so forth. What about recognition or awards of that sort? Do you
have those? Yes. We sponsor an award. It's an annual award for the best long
science fiction poem of the year and the best short science fiction poem. And
the cutting line is 50 lines. If it's over 50 lines, it's considered long. If
it's under 50 lines, it's considered short. And the purpose we basically sponsor
the award is not only recognition to poets who are normally not getting
recognition within the field because poetry is basically used as a white space
filler, a white hole filler, but also as a promotion. I've been seeing, this is
going to have to be edited out because I'm dating the show here, but I've seen
things around the convention about the Clark Ashton Smith Award. Does that have
anything to do with poetry? Yes.
It's a committee award. There are like eight, ten people who supposedly have
credentials about poetry and science fiction and worked up an elaborate three
-part system for figuring out who would be awarded poems. And it has much more
categories and involves fantasy poetry. But that's not related to your
organization so much. It's not related to our organization, no. Okay, now, do
professional authors belong to your group? I mean, are they part of your...
Well, as far as I'm concerned, a poet that has published somewhere is a
professional author. If you're considering a name author, I can name them. If
you mean authors who take it seriously, there's plenty of us, and a lot of us
have only been published in obscure places, but we take it seriously. I assume
you're saying name authors. Well, Gene Wolfe's the president is Ted Sturgeon,
Michael Bishop,
Roger Zelazny, yeah. He signed up just before he went to Ireland. Ursula K. Le
Guin. Lizzie Lynn. David R. Bunch. Edward Bryant.
Gregory Benford. Gregory Benford. Do all these authors themselves, I take it,
write science fiction poetry? Tom Dish. Yes. To some extent, or at least they
write poetry. It doesn't matter so much in the organization whether you write
science fiction poetry or not. If you're interested in science fiction and you
write poetry, those kind of people join too. But it is sort of, it's a gathering
of people who at some point may reorganize into something different. At the
moment we're getting to know each other and reading each other's poems and kind
of making the science fiction genre and literary genres altogether aware that
the modern scientific thought and the mode of poetry as a literary format of
explaining yourself or creating a fiction have come together quite well in our
modern times. I take it that there's no money in this. Nobody does it for the
money. Well, no, I think that's true with almost every poet in the United
States. They actually, even the ones that you could name which are professional
and well-known, make much more money doing university talk circuits than they do
off of their own poetry books. And in science fiction, most you can get for a
poem is basically $25. And if you're getting published in something like Isaac
Asimov's, chances are you'd have one poem a year there. So stiff competition for
what's very little white space to fill. Okay, I just lost my train of thought. I
had another question.
Okay, this is sort of a philosophical question.
Does science fiction poetry, can you do anything with science fiction poetry or
does it offer anything that would make it special or different than normal
poetry? It's going to be a little hard to take that one off the top of my head,
but I do have at least one angle I see on that. Yes, today science has found
some things about the universe, especially let's use physics as an example, or
found some things. Because science has become so specialized and that any
scientist today is almost a specialist in this field, we're discovering the real
depths of a lot of science, including psychology. But let's pick physics, okay.
They've come up against things like black holes, singularities, monopoles. And
these are things which cannot be systematically and rationally explained. And
you will find in the scientific texts that are discussing these possibilities,
these kind of rips in Einsteinian space-time continuum or however you want to
look at them. They're anomalies. The science books are using, even like Carl
Sagan will use a poem, for example, to help explain, to help visualize what it
could possibly be or how it exists. And because poetry can, in a small space,
deal with something which can be abstract, it doesn't always have to be
abstract, it doesn't have to be unreadable, and it doesn't have to be boring,
but because it can deal with some things that are abstract in a small amount of
space. Poetry can be, or poetic talk, even if it's in a prose sense, or even in
a speech, can deal with abstract things nicely. Okay, very good.
The only poetry that I've been familiar with that would belong to the field of
fantasy and science fiction, I think, would be the work of, say, like Robert E.
Howard and so forth. He's published first. Now that, I guess, would be sword and
sorcery, fantasy, whatever you wanted to call it. Does that qualify? I would
qualify that as fantasy poetry. Certainly he was a man who was writing basically
for a fantasy market and was using the same thematic material in his poems. That
qualifies.
You don't want me to make a judgment on his poetry, dude. Go ahead. I think it
stinks. Okay. Anything else? You want me to quote that? No, that's okay. I don't
know how to quite phrase this one. You can edit that out. Okay.
Speaking of a name author for a moment, okay? A name author.
I guess you'd have to make a judgment here to be a very personal kind of
response, but why would that person who can make some money spent writing short
stories and novels and so forth, why would he dabble or write in poetry? Well,
knowing a lot of these people that you would pick possibly, or people we
mentioned previously, a lot of them wrote poetry first and extensively. And they
seem to be people who weren't squelched in the public high school system about
the boredom and the abstract and the unreadability of poetry and that they wrote
it during their high school times in their early youth and possibly gave up
writing altogether and then came back with an urge to write and a strong urge
and a money-making urge and went to prose and write prose well but never have
lost the interest in poetry. And also, writers just tend to write in any form
they can. A lot of them don't, the name writers you're thinking of or we're
talking about don't write all that much poetry but, you know, writers write and
they'll pick any format they can in order to say what's proper and in the style
that's proper for what they want to say. Poetry is often much better for what
you want to say than is prose or non-fiction.
Do you have any any particular titles either of books or poems that you think
are particularly good that anybody listening might get a hold of if they would
like to know more about this? I suggest a book called Holding Your Eight Hands.
It's been reprinted as a paperback by Doubleday last year. It originally was
published in 1969. The editor is Edward Lucie-Smith and it's a collection of
science fiction poetry. It's an international collection actually, although not
widely international as British and I think some Australian authors and American
authors in it. There's an anthology of poetry coming out from a man here in
Denver, Steve Raznick-Tem. And it's an offshoot of a magazine he's been editing
of speculative poetry for three or four years. It's called The Umbral Anthology.
It will use poetry out of what I see as the history of science fiction poetry.
There's also, coming up, an anthology in a couple of years by Bruce McAllister
and Dick Allen who are both writers of science fiction poetry and both people
who work in academic jobs in the United States which is going to attempt to do
the same thing, create a comprehensive anthology of some sort. And there is
Starline which is our newsletter which publishes original poetry, markets, we
have a workshop in there, we have news related to science fiction and poetry, we
have letter columns and everything that basically ties our organization
together. There are some small literary magazines which totally focus on science
fiction. Uranus comes out of Wisconsin
and there are some that's one example of that. And then, as a peripheral
magazine that might be a small press science fiction magazine but which uses
poetry quite a bit, there's Owl Flight which comes out of Oroville, California,
I believe. Oakland. Oakland, California, I'm sorry.
and Aurora which is another Madison, comes out of Madison, Wisconsin. It's a
feminist science fiction magazine. It sounds like this is something that's going
to catch on very fast then. Since I've been involved in it, it has caught on
like wildflower. Edit that one. Since I've been involved in it, it has caught on
like wildfire with Isaac Asimov's and Amazing using sometimes three to four
poems an issue. And since about 1978, the theme anthology has become real
popular in science fiction. Say on the theme of shape changing, the future at
war, let's say, time travel without a spaceship. Various, very specific theme
anthologies and a lot of them have been buying poetry. There's one thing I
didn't quite catch at the beginning. I want to ask it again. Maybe you didn't
say it or maybe I didn't catch it. Who is the individual or individuals who was
most responsible for starting the Science Fiction Poetry Association? The lady's
name is Suzette Hayden Elgin. She is a professional science fiction writer who
is well known and right now lives in Arkansas. Okay.